---
title: "all Disease Begins In The Gut"
description: "all disease begins in the gut"
published_at: 2014-02-17
published: true
slug: all-disease-begins-in-the-gut
category: articles
archive_id: 65
---

<div>More than 2000 years ago, Hippocrates (the father of Medicine), said “all disease begins in the gut”. We are now only beginning to realize how right he was.<br><br><br>
A major driving force in why humans have evolved to where we have is the intricate relationship between the millions of bacteria that live in our gut (called microbiota) and our immune system. The gut is home to around 100 TRILLION microbiota. You might be surprised to how these tiny little bugs play a very important role in keeping you healthy.<br><br><br>
Keeping the gut healthy does not only go as far as making sure you eat enough fibre so that you go to the toilet every day. The gut’s function goes so much further than just excreting the waste from the food we eat. It is one of the body’s first lines of defense and one of most important players in our immune system. Many of your ailments that you currently suffer from (even things typically “non-gut related” such as diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, autism, chronic fatigue and depression) may be linked to poor gut health. In addition, you can very likely prevent future ailments by making sure your gut is as healthy as can be. <br><br><br>
Unfortunately, the modern lifestyle is not doing much to maintain our gut health. We have diets high in refined carbs, sugar and processed foods, low in non-digestible carbs, high in dietary toxins and inflammatory foods, we are chronically stressed, we have a lot of infections for which we take a lot of antibiotics (which mess with the level of natural microbiota in the gut). <br><br><br><span class="underLine">The role of microbiota in the gut:</span><br><br><br>
Microbiota have 3 main jobs in our intestine: metabolic functions (without these bugs our body cannot make vitamin K or certain B vitamins), trophic (provision of nutrients to the cells lining the gut) and protective. In order to understand how they have a protective role, think of them as little soldiers, manning the cells that line your gut. Their job is to not let anything through the cells that doesn’t belong there. They also use up all the nutrients available in the gut so that any harmful bacteria that manage to slip through the net don’t have much chance of survival. <br><br><br>
Much of our research on the link between our gut bacteria and our immune system is done on what are termed “germ-free” animals, such as mice. These animals are reared in a completely sterile environment which keeps them free of bacteria, viruses and any other nasties. Different strains of microbiota are then given to the animal, so that it can colonise in the intestine. By studying their susceptibility to the development of disease, these living test tubes are critical in determining which of our immune functions are genetically coded (i.e. determined by our genes or DNA) and which are determined by our gut microbiota. <br><br><br><span class="underLine">What determines whether I have the right type of microbiota in my gut?</span><br><br><br>
The level and types of microbiota determines (along with your DNA of course) your immune system and your physical make-up. For example, let’s look at 2 “test-tube” mice which have been bred to be identical in every way. Differing levels and types of microbiota in each mouse can lead to very different metabolic and inflammatory responses (in other words one may develop a mouse-equivalent of diabetes or irritable bowel syndrome, where the other wouldn’t). <br><br><br>
So how is one’s microbiota determined? The very first way is when we are still in our mother’s womb where we swallow the amniotic fluid (or the liquid that surrounds us in the womb) which naturally contains our mom’s microbiota. And so already, before we are even born, our intestine is becoming colonized. The second way is when we are actually born – babies born via a natural birth (as opposed to a caesarian section) swallow the mother’s bacteria on their way out. Babies born via c-section will get some of their mom’s bugs but have more chance of picking up bugs from external factors such as the nurse or the hospital environment as well. As you grow up, your diet plays an extremely important role in determining the composition of the microbiota – in other words your diet determines what type of bugs you have in your gut as well as how well-stocked your gut is with them. Studies have shown that people living in differing countries, and therefore following different diets, have different types and levels of gut microbiota. <br><br><br><span class="underLine">Improving the diet to promote good gut health:</span><br><br><br>
One of the main metabolic functions of the gut microbiota is to produce something called short-chain fatty acids (SCFA’s). These SFCA’s are food for the cells lining the gut, and so are very necessary in keeping your gut healthy and functioning properly. SCFA’s are the end result of non-digestible carbohydrates being broken down by the gut microbiota. <br><br>
	Eat plenty of vegetables (especially fibrous ones such as broccoli but it is important to include a variety), nuts, seeds and some dense fruits such as apples. Whole-grains are often promoted as good sources of fibre. Unfortunately, even in products advertised as whole-grain or unrefined, modern-processing techniques often remove much of the indigestible fibre from the product before it gets to the shelf.  If you do choose whole-grains, make sure you know what to look for on the label. Fermentable foods, such as kefir and sauerkraut, are invaluable sources of gut health.<br>
	Probiotic supplementation is another invaluable route to gut health. Be careful though – not all probiotics off the shelf will work as they claim to. It needs to be proven to be efficacious, stable throughout gut transit and of high quality. Chat to your dietician about choosing a good quality probiotic. <br>
	Cut out ALL refined carbohydrates and sugars – these, along with stress, illness and medications (especially antibiotics) can kill off all the good microbiota, leaving the gut vulnerable to bad bacteria which tend to feed off these carbohydrates. <br><br><br>
Currently there is much interest in the role of Vitamin D and the health of our gut. Evert heard of “leaky gut syndrome”?  Basically this means that the spaces between the epithelial cells which make up the lining of the gut have widened, creating the chance for harmful bacteria to enter. The active form of Vitamin D (which your body makes if it gets enough of the inactive form) is responsible for the up-regulation of the genes which create the proteins which keep the epithelial cells tightly packed together.  Leaky gut can be caused by a diet high in processed and refined foods. You don’t have to have any “gut” symptoms to have leaky gut syndrome – it can manifest as eczema, depression and rheumatoid arthritis, amongst other conditions. <br><br><br>
Helicobacter pylori is a “bad” bacteria, commonly involved in infections.  High levels of Helicobacter pylori cause inflammation in the gut, and several studies have shown that Vitamin D is beneficial in decreasing this inflammatory state. There have also been strong links identified between low Vitamin D levels and the development of inflammatory bowel disease such as Chrons disease.  <br><br><br>
We have always been told that living in sunny South Africa should provide us with enough sunlight for our body to make sufficient Vitamin D. However, more research is coming out to indicate the recommended daily allowance of Vitamin D may be too low and we may in fact need more to promote optimum gut health.<br><br><br>
	Chat to your dietician about how you can get tested to see what your Vitamin D levels are. Once you know that, he or she will be able to advise you on appropriate supplementation. <br>
	Cut out all processed and inflammatory foods. Too much omega 6 in the diet can be a cause of inflammation – swap out your seed oils (such as margarine, sunflower, canola or corn oil) for butter, olive oil or coconut oil.</div>