---
title: Figuring Out The Fats
description: Figuring out the fats
published_at: 2014-06-07
published: true
slug: figuring-out-the-fats
category: articles
archive_id: 85
---

<div>Fat has received a bad rap in the past – it has been demonised as something that clogs up our arteries leading to heart attacks, and something with makes us fat. Well, it is a little more complicated than that and you may be glad to know that you don’t have to restrict your fat as much as you were told to in the past.<br><br><br>
Let’s face it: fat is delicious.  No food tastes the same with the fat removed. Compare a  creamy, full-fat yoghurt to a thin watery low fat one. No comparison right? Because we all believe that fat makes us fat and that is bad for our hearts, food manufacturers have strived to make their products low-fat or fat-free. But because food tends to taste like cardboard without the fat, something has had to be added in to improve the taste. Enter the real demon – sugar.<br><br><br>
Most people think of fat as purely a source of calories, and think that to avoid becoming fat it needs to be avoided. Besides being a source of calories, it is an essential source of nutrients as well.  The fat soluble vitamins – namely vitamins A, D, E and K are found in fat sources, along with many minerals.  Fats which come from a plant source provide anti-oxidants and phytonutrients. Last but most definitely not least, fat is a vital source of the essential (essential because the body cannot make them) fatty acids: omega 3 and 6. It is easy to see then that if you are following a very low fat diet, you may be excluding a lot of these important nutrients.<br><br><br>
Fat can be split up into 3 families: saturated fats, polyunsaturated fats and monounsaturated fats. <br><br><br>
Saturated fats are those which are solid at room temperature. Sources are eggs, meat, milk, yoghurt, cheese, lard, ghee, butter, and coconut oil. They are still considered by some to be artery clogging and therefore should be avoided. As explained above in the yoghurt example, this often means that saturated fat is replaced with sugar which is very likely to be even more heart-unhealthy than the saturated fat itself. A review of evidence has shown us that saturated fat is not associated with a greater risk of heart disease, as compared to other risk factors. In fact, saturated fat intake can change the pattern of the fats found in the blood, protecting one from heart disease.  Don’t be scared to include a moderate amount of saturated fat in your diet –  for example, I would always advocate butter over margarine and full-fat plain or unsweetened yoghurt over low-fat fruit flavoured (i.e. sugar laden) yoghurt.<br><br><br>
Monounsaturated fats and the benefits thereof are well-known and accepted. Along with polyunsaturated fats, monounsaturated fats are liquid at room temperature. This is the main type of fat found in a Mediterranean diet, a population well-known to suffer from relatively low levels of heart disease. Sources of monounsaturated fats are olives and olive oil, raw nuts and seeds, avocado and avocado oil and nut butters (make sure these have no additives or preservatives).<br><br><br>
The essential fatty acids, omega 3, and 6, are found within the polyunsaturated fat group. A quick note on these fatty acids: omega 3 is anti-inflammatory while omega 6 is pro-inflammatory. We now know that inflammation is one of the most important risk factors for the development of chronic disease and so the inclusion of the anti-inflammatory omega 3 is so important. Omega 6 is pro-inflammatory and is found in a lot of the foods we eat as it is incorporated into nearly every baked, fried and/or processed food available. Vegetable and seed oils (which, ironically, we have been told we must choose instead of saturated animal fats) are rich in omega 6 and this is perhaps perpetuating the level of chronic disease we see today.  The ratio of omega 3 to 6 is very important – it used to be 1:1 – 5 when we were living as hunter-gatherers, but with the establishment of agriculture and the increase in processed foods it has increased to about 1:20!<br><br><br>
Good sources of omega 3 include dark oil fish, such as sardines and salmon, almonds, brussel sprouts, walnuts and flax seed.  It is worth speaking to your health care practitioner about an omega 3 supplement, especially if you have a history of raised cholesterol or triglycerides. <br><br><br>
So far I hope that I have put across successfully that saturated, monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats are ALL important in the diet. There is another type of fat that is so down right awful it should be avoided at all costs. Unfortunately, it is in nearly every single baked, fried and processed food out there.<br>
This evil fat is referred to as trans fat, but you have probably seen it on food labels referred to as “partially hydrogenated vegetable oil”.<br><br>
Trans fats does naturally occur in some foods, such as meat. However, the trans fat that I am referring to is man-made and makes up 99% of all the trans fat found in food. It is created when liquid oils are made into solid fats. This process increases the shelf-life and stability of a food, which is why you will find it in nearly every cracker, biscuit, crisp, chip, confectionary, processed food, sauce and ready-meal out there. It is also found in brick margarine. There is no shadow of a doubt that trans fats are bad for you as they DO increase your risk for heart disease. Chances are that if you are eating foods which contain trans fats you are also eating highly refined, processed, genetically modified foods containing many preservatives and additives. the solution is simple - eat real food. Real food is something that was alive until very recently :)</div>